---
title: 

head:
  - - meta
    - name: description
      content: 
  - - meta
    - name: keywords
      content:    
---

<div style="text-align: justify">
<div class="  font-serif    text-base  font-normal tracking-wide">

### Resource mobilization

[[toc]]

- Mobilizing is the process of assembling and organizing things for ready use or achieving a collective goal. Mobilization of resources should also be seen in the same context. Mobilization of resources means freeing up of locked resources. Every country has the economic resources within its territory not be available for collective use. The percentage of resources used when compared to the potential is often very low. For a country to grow, identification and mobilization of its resources is necessary. It should be available for easy use and for central and state level planning.

- Resource mobilization is a process, which will identify the resources critical for the development, implementation and continuation of work for achieving the national mission. In real terms, Resource mobilization means expansion of relations with the resource providers, the skills, knowledge and capacity of proper use of resources.

- All activities undertaken by a start-up or an organization to secure new and additional financial, human and material resources to advance its mission. Inherent in efforts to mobilize resources is the drive for organizational sustainability.

- Resource mobilization advocates upon having the right type of resource, at the right time, at right price with making right use of acquired resources thus ensuring optimum utilization of the same.

### Definition of a resource

- Resource is anything which has some value and is required to accomplish some desired objective. Resource refers to all the materials available in our environment which help us to satisfy our needs and wants. An item becomes a resource with time and developing technology.

- Domestic resources can be defined as the economic resources that are present within the territory of any country. These resources, irrespective of their presence and potential are not collectively utilized. This, in turn, leads to a disparity between the estimated potential of those resources and their actual use.

#### Resources have three common features:

- Utility: Resources are used to satisfy the consumer.
- Limited availability: Resources are inadequately available against demand.
- Potential for depletion: Resources are gradually reduced as they are used.
- Resources form the backbone of the economy of a nation. Without land, water, forest, air, mineral one cannot develop agriculture and industry. They constitute natural environment like air, water, forests and various life forms, which are essential for human survival and development. By utilizing natural resources, humans created their own world of houses, buildings, means of transport and communication, industries etc. These are also very useful along with natural resources and these human made resources are essential for development.

### Need for mobilizing resource in an economy

- Resources are needed for every type of economy, whether it is a police state or a democratic welfare state. Every business model requires them, and it is only through them that companies generate Value Propositions and Revenues. Key resources can be physical, financial, intellectual, or human.

#### Steps in Resources Management

- Identify
- Engage
- Negotiate
- Manage and Report
- Communicating Result

###

Every economy strives to fulfil some basic needs and aspirations of its citizen and for that it does following works:

- It is helpful in maintaining Organizational Sustainability.
- It keeps a check and guarantees continuation of the organization’s (government or non-government) service provision.
- Diversifies and expand resources- It supports the expansion of the organization’s products and services.
- Enhance resource efficiency and promote the use of secondary raw materials as a strategy to minimise the potential trade-off between growth and sustainability
- It is crucial to any organizations existence, as any organization, be it in the public sector or private sector, must continually generate new business to maintain a perpetual presence.
- Formulates an independent budget (fund).
- Allows spending and utilization of resources
- Minimize dependency on others, Sustains the nation and its policies and Maximize use of domestic capital and skills
- Low resource utilisation increases virgin resource demand, triggering high environmental burden and production costs.
- It paves the way for improvement of the available services and products.
- A welfare state ensures social security. The government plays a dominant role in controlling the economic activities and in the social welfare of the people, which requires resource mobilization.
- It exercises control over all the economic activities. In a welfare state, all the private enterprises are regulated by the government.
- Greater reliance on Domestic Resource Mobilization is vital to elevating economic growth, accelerating poverty reduction and underpinning sustained development.
- It provides even the basic facilities to its citizens. Furnishing services to each and every individual is its duty. A welfare government is keen in providing economic and social services such as general education, public health, public transport, housing, and other financial assistance to its people.
- It undertakes and runs various enterprises. Ownership and operation of industrial enterprises, business and other commercial activities are also done by welfare governments.
- It ensures justice for all. In a welfare state, common man has to deal with the authorities for many of their needs. For example; administrative officers, controlling officers, sanctioning authorities, officers of social services, executives of public sector undertakings etc. In all such dealings, a welfare state has the responsibility to ensure justice and fulfilment of their requirements.
- Domestic Resource Mobilization is more predictable and less volatile than aid, export earnings, or FDI.
- It is the function of a welfare state to regulate and control all private enterprises engaged in economic activities. Such control includes registration, licensing, taxation etc.
- The welfare of labourers also comes under the purview of the duties of welfare state. They are bound to make legislations to prevent exploitation of workers, and to ensure the security and welfare of those who work in industrial enterprises, factories, companies and all other sectors of employment. All of the above aspects are directly or indirectly pertains to the issue of resources and its mobilization. - Hence the need of resource mobilization is vital in any welfare state.

#### Need for Mobilization of Natural Resources

- India, though a country with sufficient reserves, due to policy bottlenecks, is importing coal and iron. This is increasing our Current Account Deficit.
- India is also facing technological obstacles to exploit some of it’s the natural resources.
- India is also suffering from the domestic factors like political factors, resistance from tribal people to development and exploitation of resources, inter-state conflicts, disputes with neighbouring countries, etc.

#### Need for Mobilization of Human Resources

- Organizing human potential for ready use is necessary for growth of India. In-fact, as country of 125 crore people, India now is eyeing more on its human resource potential. The demographic dividend is also in favour of India.
- Mobilization of human resources highlights the need to empower human resources.
- Weaker sections like women, children, SC, ST, OBC etc. should be brought into mainstream.
- There should be right employment opportunities for human resources, and when there is lack of skill the job demands, there should be skill development programs.
- Utilize the demographic dividend.

#### Need for Mobilization of Financial Resources

- If a country needs to grow, more goods and services should be produced. The production can be done by government sector, private sector or in PPP mode. But for that, the economic resources of a country should be mobilised.
- In India, despite having good savings rate, domestic investment is less. Indians are investing in less productive assets like gold and consumer durable. If India needs to grow, there should be more investments in agriculture, manufacturing or services.
- In India, tax collected is very less. The tax base has to be widened.
  Organizations do not “spontaneously emerge” but require the mobilization of resources.
- In modern capitalistic society, these resources are more “free flowing” and are easier to mobilize than in more traditional societies. Many factors impact the development of the organization.
- Initial Resource Mix: There are various resource needs in a starting organization (technology, labour, capital, organizational structure, societal support, legitimacy, etc.). But the right mix of resources is not always available.

#### Sources of resource mobilization in India

Resources can be mobilized either for short term or for long term. Public sector mobilises resources in two ways:

#### 1. Taxation

Public revenue generation for investment in social services and infrastructure.

#### 2. Private sector mobilises resources in following ways:

The private sector mobilizes the savings of households and firms through financial intermediaries, which allocate these resources to investment in productive activities.

### Role of Fiscal Policy in Resource Mobilization

- In a liberal mixed economy, such as ours the task of fiscal policy is not only to raise saving ratio for acceleration of growth, but also to improve investment in the private sector so that higher rate of investment be achieved.
- Public finance assumes a new significance in the face of the problem of resource mobilization in underdeveloped countries.
- On the expenditure side, there is a positive need for public investment, especially in those spheres of economic activity where the private investments are not easily attracted, for example, the development of power resources, roads and highway, ports and airports, means of transport and communications, basic heavy industries, social infrastructure such as education and research, public health etc. Such investments are very often the very foundations of rapid economic advance.
- Thus, fiscal policy is of crucial importance in accelerating the pace of economic growth in developing countries. Fiscal policy, if properly designed, is an efficient and equitable way of mobilizing resources for augmenting public investment.
- Through it not only that collective public savings can be raised for financing public investment, but also at the same time private savings and investment can be encouraged.
- In other words, Fiscal policy allows the government to mobilize resources for public expenditure and development. There are three ways of resource mobilization viz., taxation, public savings and private savings through issue of bonds and securities.
- The fiscal policy can be so devised that not only the objective of rapid capital accumulation or growth, but also other objectives of economic policy, such as equitable distribution of income and wealth, price stability and promotion of employment opportunities can be achieved.

### Role of Tax in Resource Mobilization

- Resource mobilization is of strategic importance for bringing about rapid economic growth. It is, therefore, necessary to achieve a higher ratio of savings to national income.
- Taxation can be used to raise collective savings for public investment and also at the same time to promote private investment.
- A well-conceived scheme of taxation is an important way of raising the ratio of savings to national income which is one of the crucial determinants of the rate of economic growth.
- India has organized tax structure with clearly defined authority between Central and State Governments and local bodies.
- Central Government levies taxes on income (except tax on agricultural income, which the State Governments can levy), customs duties, central excise and service tax.
- Value Added Tax (VAT), stamp duty, state excise, land revenue and profession tax are imposed by the State Governments.
- Local bodies are empowered to levy tax on properties and for utilities like water supply, drainage.
- irect taxes, i.e., taxes paid by households and companies to the government or other public agencies. This includes income tax, payroll tax (including mandatory social health insurance contributions) and corporate or profit tax.
- Indirect taxes, i.e., taxes paid to the government or other public agency via a third party (retailer or supplier). The tax is based on what a household or company spends and includes value-added tax, sales tax, and excise tax on alcohol and tobacco and import duties. Now, as many of the indirect taxes have been subsumed in single tax, i.e., GST so now onwards GST becomes an important source of resource mobilization.
- Non-tax revenues (from state-owned companies, including natural resource revenues such as oil and gas).
- Financing from external (foreign) sources is considered ‘public’ when the funds flow through recipient governments.
- Savings and investments are another important way of understanding the sources of resource mobilization.
- It has been suggested that an appropriate tax, which would mobilize resources or mop up economic surplus is the progressive income tax. Income tax is imposed not only on the incomes of individuals, but also on the profits of the corporate companies.
- Thus, there is personal income tax and corporate income tax (that is, tax on net profits earned by corporate companies).
- In India and the other developing countries, income has been regarded as a good base for direct taxation. And the imposition of highly progressive income tax, not only mops up relatively greater amount of resources, but also tend to reduce inequalities of income.
- However, a progressive income tax with a high marginal rates of taxes adversely affects private saving and investment and also raises the propensity to evade the tax. In view of this, two proposals have been put forward to make the income tax both as an effective instrument of resource mobilisation for the public sector and of providing incentives to save and invest.

#### - Role of Capital/ Financial Markets in Resource Mobilization

- Economy consists of huge number of enterprises and individuals, requirements of all of them differ. Some have surplus cash to save, while some other needs cash.
- Some firms/individuals wants to make good there short term liquidity requirements, some wants money for long term capital investment.
- So distinction can be made as to period for which one intends to lend or borrow. In this sense financial market is categorized into money market and capital markets. - In Money market, period involved (for funds movement) is 1 year or less, while in capital markets period is generally more than 1 year.
- As economy of the country grows, highly specialized institutions comes up which caters exclusively to capital needs and banks continues its money market business. - These institutions are known as Capital Market intermediaries.
- These are intermediaries like insurance companies, housing finance companies, pension funds, and investment funds etc. which mobilize savings and fund long term investments.
- Financial market is a market where financial instruments are exchanged or traded and helps in determining the prices of the assets that are traded (also called the price discovery process). These facilitate trade in financial assets by providing platform for coming together of buyers and sellers or Borrowers or Lenders.
- Stock exchanges are ‘markets’ (or mandis) where prospective buyer and seller meets and item traded is Shares, debentures, bonds etc. In early days, there was physical interface between two parties; there were mediators in stock exchanges, which for a commission used to negotiate the deal.
- In present times stock markets indicate health of an economy. They are primary means of mobilization of long term savings and investment and fixed capital formation. Further, when volume of trade in markets is significant, it leads to transparent price discovery.
- There are other forms of savings under which small denominations of savings gets together to form significant investment figures. These are mainly Insurance, - Provident fund and pension Savings (also called contractual savings). These have an important social security angle, but here focus is on resource mobilization through them.
- These funds have long maturity (repayment) period so they are better placed to cater need of projects with long gestation periods like infrastructure.
- Angel investors who invest in small start-ups or entrepreneurs are another important source of resource mobilization in an economy. Often, angel investors are among an entrepreneur’s family and friends. The capital angel investors provide may be a onetime investment to help the business propel or an ongoing injection of money to support and carry the company through its difficult early stages.
- Insurance: Insurance is service in which individual economic risk is spread over large number of people. Any loss that can be quantified in money can be insured. For e.g. Life Insurance provides risk cover on life of a person. Life cannot be quantified in itself, but economic hardships on survivors of a deceased breadwinner can be undoubtedly quantified in money terms, so this way life insurance can be done.
- Mutual Funds: Different shares in the market carry different kind and degree of risks. So an investors instead of putting all eggs in one basket, diversifies its portfolio. He attempts to minimize his risk and maximize return by investing in both debt and equity and further within equity, he picks up various sectors – infra, textile, IT, Cement, Housing, banking etc.
- Venture Capital (VC) which is a type of private equity, a form of financing that is provided by firms or funds to small, early-stage, emerging firms that are deemed to have high growth potential, or which have demonstrated high growth (in terms of number of employees, annual revenue, or both).
- Venture capital firms or funds invest in these early-stage companies in exchange for equity, or an ownership stake, in the companies they invest in. Venture capitalists take on the risk of financing risky start-ups in the hopes that some of the firms they support will become successful. Thus VC are another important source of resource mobilization in an economy.

### - Role of Banking/ Banks in Resource Mobilization

- The institutions which basically facilitate Resource Mobilization are called ‘financial Intermediaries’ (FI). Most important FI are Banks, Insurance, and Capital Markets. Bank which is a financial institution that accepts deposits from the public and creates credit. Banks are the perhaps prime Financial Institutional source of resource mobilization.
- Surplus money you have can be (among many other things) invested in Stock markets or deposited in banks. Banks guarantee repayment of whole sum along with pre agreed interest, so there is high degree of certainty and assurance to the depositor. In contrast, Stock exchanges provide no such assurances;
- Specialized financial institutions which are banks, which concentrate mainly on financing specialized economic and social activities. Specialized activities may be: z small and cottage industries financing z insurance company’s z commercial mortgage lenders z specialty equipment financing organizations.
- In India these institutions mainly include, Export-Import Bank of India, Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction, Small Industries Development Bank of India, National Housing Bank. They are government undertakings established with a view to offer financial as well as technical assistance to the Indian industries.
- In the initial phases of economic development, banks are main means of resource mobilization in an economy. On same lines, this is case currently with India. This is because majority people in such economies are too risk averse.
- New firms in developing economies find it difficult to raise much money through capital markets and consequently, they naturally go to banks for loans.
- As Indian economy is expanding, capital markets are getting stronger year by year. This makes banking industry a most important backbone of Indian economy.
- Effective Resource mobilization will aim at channelizing resources toward most productive sectors and avenues, which yield maximum good for least advantaged people.

### Indicators used to measure Resource Efficiency

- Resource efficiency = GDP/Domestic Material Consumption
  It also calculated as, RE = GDP/Material flow indicator (MFA)

- Issues faced in resource mobilization in recent times
  The significant drawbacks highlighting the Human resources, the financial resources and natural resources affect the overall Mobilization of resources in a nation.

- Foreign aid comes with its fair share of restrictions and conditions.
  While foreign direct investment is helpful in attainment of commercial objectives of the concerned investor, it does little for the host country’s developmental plans.
- Limited Domestic public resources:
- It makes least developed countries (LDCs) highly dependent on external resources which limit their policy space and create some dependency.
- Low – income countries are in a state of perpetual struggle with poverty. In such a situation, resource mobilization can be a challenge. This is a major reason why a majority of developing economies rely on foreign direct investment, export earnings, foreign aid, and other external sources.
- If a consistent and significant economic growth must be achieved, it is vital to decrease the rate of poverty in the economy.
- Weak Domestic taxation and fiscal policies:
- The fiscal discipline is hardly seen in developing countries. They often resort to deficit financing to pursue development.
- The taxes are not broad-based and tax evasion is common in developing countries which squeeze out the chances for public expenditure.
- A strong foundational support for uninterrupted sustainable development must also be attained.
- Lack of National and sub-regional development banks with rural penetration:
- Though India is enjoying the presence of big national and international banks but the financial inclusion at rural level has been a myth.
- Moreover, 2008 financial crisis brought national development banks back onto the policy agenda, as countries sought sources of long-term financing to stimulate economic recoveries, and there is greater international acceptance of such banks. - However, poorer and smaller developing countries may face greater obstacles in setting up such banks, due to funding and technical constraints.
- Illicit financial flows from developing countries:
- Illicit financial flows involve resources that have been obtained, transferred or used illegally or illicitly.
- A common concern with regard to illicit financial flows from developing countries is the identification of flows considered potentially damaging to economic development.
- In developing economies, vital development resources are being lost because of the ease with which capital flight can flourish in the context of a burgeoning yet opaque international financial system [and] closely related to this is the idea that illicit capital flows from developing economies are indicative of deeper structural problems of political governance in these countries.
- Concerns over illicit financial flows therefore reflect a range of relevant policy concerns, yet underlying analytical frameworks and empirical methodologies continue to be the subject of debate. Illicit financial flows need not be illegal if relevant legal frameworks do not adequately reflect wider public social and economic interests or do not cover such flows.
- International tax cooperation:
- The combating of illicit financial flows has been a core driver of international tax cooperation in recent years.
- In general, international tax cooperation assumes particular importance in a world of hyper globalization, in which tax systems in some countries can affect public revenue collection in other countries.
- Such cross-national effects can result from tax evasion, for example if high net worth individuals place financial assets in tax havens, as well as from illicit financial flows arising from the creative accounting or transfer pricing practices of multinational enterprises.
- Lack of Multilateral development Banks:
- Financing needs to support the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals are considerable.
- Lack of financing is not due to a shortfall in global savings; at the global level, institutional investors currently have assets under their management totalling $115 trillion. Most are in the form of developed country securities and other assets that offer low returns.
- Multilateral development banks and other international banks, existing and new, are therefore needed to bridge finance from end-savers to development projects. Development banks can thus be key players in development by providing long-term financing directly from their funding sources, by tapping into new sources and by leveraging additional resources, including private, through the co-financing of projects with other partners.

### Steps to be taken to address issues resource mobilization

- By intervention government should attempt to build capacity of people to survive and grow themselves in market. But at same time government has to set minimum standards and provide safety nets to disadvantaged and vulnerable people of the society.
- To utilize the demographic dividend. India is currently forcing on its technologists, engineers, doctors and scientists. Government is making efforts to divert school dropouts to technical or vocational training program.
- The scheme has been formulated through private public partnership under which short term training modules will be conducted (Gupta, 2008) such as Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY), SANKALP and UDAAN.
- The Ministry of Mines has launched a portal “SATYABHAMA (Science and Technology Yojana for Atmanirbhar Bharat in Mining Advancement)”with an aim to promote research and development in the mining and minerals sector.
- Poverty alleviation and community actions; Community mobilization is a process through which action is stimulated by a community itself, or by others, that is planned, carried out, and evaluated by a community’s individuals, groups, and organizations on a participatory and sustained basis to improve the health, hygiene and education levels so as to enhance the overall standard of living in the community and thereby the economy.
- Focus of Resource Efficiency: Resource efficiencyor resource productivity is the ratio between a given benefit or result and the natural resource use required for it. Resource efficiency is a strategy to achieve the maximum possible benefit with least possible resource input.
- Viability Gap Funding (VGF)that can help businesses overcome the barriers and become competitive over time by building scale and upgradation of technology.
- Policy reformsacross life cycle stages focussing on their design, emphasis, integration or implementation.
- Tax reformscan play an important role in steering the economy towards resource efficient practices and circular economy. Value-added taxes should be levied on value-added activities like mining, construction, and manufacturing.
- Capacity developmentof key actors responsible for undertaking or overseeing RE/SRM strategies, including ULBs, MSMEs, as well as the informal sector.
- A dedicated institutional set up for development, assessment of Resource Efficiency measures should be established.
- Baseline data collection and development of indicators.
- Eco-labelling and standard certification of products; Strengthen awareness regarding green products; Improve availability of green products in the markets; - Lowering costs of green products and Green public procurement
- New business models for resource efficiency will offer attractive opportunities for businesses and financial institutions, thereby enabling greater employment growth and diversity.
- Industrial clusters development. More savings and more productive investment.
- Four factors of production- land, labour, capital and organization – should come together. There should be an atmosphere for growth and investment.
- Resource efficiency yields significant cost benefits by reducing virgin raw materials extraction, import dependency and energy and process materials.
- Creating multi-stakeholder collaboration platforms will enable exchange of ideas and their deployment, eventually generating new business models, resource efficient products, and demonstrating success.
- While technological development and innovation play an important role in adopting circularity during the production phase, behavioural change promoting lifecycle thinking at the consumption phase is key to the adoption of a circular economy. An integrated resource efficiency policy can bring in the desired transition.
- Financial literacy programmes should be undertaken and backed by products that address the real needs of consumers, with the support to use the product. People have to be imparted an ability to understand and execute matters of personal finance such as basic numeracy and literacy, financial awareness, knowledge and skills, attitude and behaviours needed to make sound financial decisions, budgeting, investing and risk diversification.

### For Human Resource Mobilization

- Skill Development Cell has been entrusted the responsibility to train youth by providing them skills through AICTE approved Colleges/Registered facilitators with objective for enhancing their Employment/ Self-Employment opportunities.
- Start-Up Policy for Technical Institutions:AICTE has prepared a Start-up Policy for students of Technical Institutions to create tech-based student owned start-ups and employment opportunities.
- Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojna by Technical Institutions (PMKVY-TI):This scheme is implementing through AICTE approved Colleges to impart Engineering skills to drop-out students and find placement in suitable private sector jobs.
- Community College Scheme:Under this scheme, Council provides financial assistance to AICTE approved Polytechnics to run courses as per the NSQF. Till date 74 Institutes, are running the Scheme.
- Employability Enhancement Training Programme (EETP):For implementation and enhancement of employment opportunities under skill initiatives, the Council has signed MoU’s with following organization under EETP:

- Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) 2005:The Act provides 100 days assured employment every year to every rural household. One-third of the proposed jobs would be reserved for women. The central government will also establish National Employment Guarantee Funds. Similarly, state governments will establish State Employment Guarantee Funds for implementation of the scheme. Under the programme, if an applicant is not provided employment within 15 days s/he will be entitled to a daily unemployment allowance.
- National Rural Livelihood Mission: Aajeevika (2011):It evolves out the need to diversify the needs of the rural poor and provide them jobs with regular income on a monthly basis. Self Help groups are formed at the village level to help the needy.
- National Urban Livelihood Mission:The NULM focuses on organizing urban poor in Self Help Groups, creating opportunities for skill development leading to market-based employment and helping them to set up self-employment ventures by ensuring easy access to credit.
- PM Suraksha Bima Yojana (PMSBY) – Accidental death cum disability insurance, renewable 1 year, for 18-70 age group.
- Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana (PMJJBY) – Life insurance, renewable 1 year, for 18-50 age group.
- Atal Pension Yojana – Focus on unorganised sector.
- At the manufacturing stage, flagship programmes like “Make in India”that provide special assistance to energy efficient, water efficient and pollution control technologies through Technology Acquisition and Development Fund (TADF) can promote Resource Efficiency and mobilization and SRM approaches.

### For Financial Resource Mobilization

- Regional Rural Banks (RRBs): On the basis of Narasimham Working Group 1975, RRBs were established to serve banking needs of rural population.
- Priority Sector Lending: is an important role given by the RBI to the banks for providing a portion of the bank loans to few specific sectors such as agriculture or small scale industries.
- Business correspondents: RBI permitted banks to engage business correspondents/facilitators for providing door-step delivery of financial and banking services.
- The opening of no-frills accounts: No-frills accounts means the bank accounts which does not require a minimum balance (or low sometimes) = Accessibility to vast sections of the population.
- KYC relaxation: Know Your Customer (KYC) requirements for opening bank accounts were relaxed for small accounts in August 2005. The opening of bank accounts became even easier with Aadhaar introduction.
- To expand the network of ATMs, the RBI has permitted non-bank entities to start White Label ATMs.
- Jan Dhan, Aadhaar and Mobile (JAM) –
- It is a three-part strategy based on using digital technologies
- Jan Dhan (banking), Aadhaar (Biometric Identity) and Mobile (transactions).
- Establishment of payment banks and small finance banks.
- Establishment of MUDRA bank to refinance micro-finance institutions to lend to non-formal sectors such as MSMEs through PM Mudra Yojana.
- RuPay Cards have considerably enhanced its market share.
- Financial literacy centres were launched by commercial banks at the request of the RBI.
- Financial inclusion of women through Aadhaar implementation.
- Unified Payments Interface (UPI) platform built by the National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI).
- National Centre for Financial Education was established in 2017 to implement the - National Strategy for Financial Education.
- Self-Help Group (SHG) – Bank Linkage Programme (SBLP) was launched by NABARD to provide door-step banking to the poor with the help of SHGs.
- Priority sector lending
- Priority sector refers to those sectors of the economy which may not get timely and adequate credit in the absence of this special dispensation.
- Typically, these are small value loans to farmers for agriculture and allied activities, micro and small enterprises, poor people for housing, students for education and other low income groups and weaker sections.
- Total target for banks is to lend 40% of their total lending to priority sector. Out of this 40, 18% should be in agriculture and 10% to weaker sections.

### For Natural Resource Mobilization

- Nation Green Corridor Programme: This project aims at synchronising energy that is produced from renewable energy sources with the conventional stations.
- National Clean Energy Fund: It is the fund created using the carbon tax for backing research and development of innovative eco-friendly technologies.
- National Biogas and Manure Management Programme (NBMMP): It is a central scheme that promotes setting up of Family Type Biogas Plants mostly for the use of rural and semi-urban households. The energy is generated from biodegradable wastes such as cow-dug, wastes from the garden, kitchen, etc.
- Biomass power and cogeneration programme: This scheme aims at optimum utilization of the country’s biomass resources in the power grid.
- National Housing and Habitat Policy, 2007and the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (PMAY), 2015 emphasize on developing appropriate ecological design standards for building components, materials and construction methods.
- Reduced waste generation by RE will contribute towards fulfilling the goals of Swachh Bharat.
- FDI Policy: FDI up to 100% is allowed in the renewable energy sector under the Automatic route and no prior Government approval is needed.

### Conservation of Resource

- Any resource is largely dependent on their availability. Thus the conservation of these resources is necessary. Saving water and trees or forest is the primary step of resource conservation. Opting for renewable sources like solar and wind power instead of fossil fuels is a wise option.

- Controlled utilisation of the resources would lead to retention of the same. We will be able to use them for longer period and leave some in store for the future generations too. Sustainable development should be concentrated upon.

</div>
</div>
