---
title:  
head:
  - - meta
    - name: description
      content: 
  - - meta
    - name: keywords
      content: upsc, civil service exam,
---

<div style="text-align: justify">
<div class="  font-serif    text-base  font-normal tracking-wide">


- The Post Liberalization Era: New Economic Policy and Employment: Employment and poverty, Rural wages, Employment Generation, Poverty alleviation schemes, New Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme.

### Types of unemployment


#### 
:::details  Cyclical unemployment

- Cyclical unemployment exists when individuals lose their jobs as a result of a downturn in demand of goods.
- When there is reduction in the demand for products/services, companies respond by cutting back on their production, thus making it necessary to reduce their workforce within the organization. In effect, workers are laid off.
:::
#### 
:::details  Structural unemployment

- occurs because of **long term changes** in market conditions
- a natural outcome of economic development, technological advancement and innovation that are taking place rapidly
- For example, as old industries have declined, new industries have emerged, such as IT, computing, insurance, and internet based companies.
- these new industries require a different skill set to previous manufacturing jobs & cause structural unemployment
:::
#### 
:::details  Disguised Unemployment

- It is a situation in which more people are doing work than actually required
- Even if some are withdrawn, production does not suffer.
- In other words it refers to a situation of employment with surplus manpower in which some workers have zero marginal productivity
- Overcrowding in agriculture due to rapid growth of population and lack of alternative job opportunities may be cited as the main reasons for disguised unemployment in India
:::
#### 
:::details  Seasonal unemployment

- Seasonal unemployment exists because certain industries only produce or distribute their products at certain times of the year.
- Industries where seasonal unemployment is common include farming, tourism, and construction
- in the agricultural sector where the demand for workers is more during harvesting than is required in other months in a year
:::
#### 
:::details  Frictional unemployment

- Frictional unemployment, occurs when workers lose their current job and are in the process of finding another one.
- There may be little that can be done to reduce this type of unemployment, other than provide better information to reduce the search time.
:::
#### 
:::details  Voluntary unemployment

- Voluntary unemployment is defined as a situation when workers choose not to work at the current wage rate.
- For one reason or another, workers may elect not to participate in the labour market
- There are several reasons for the existence of voluntary unemployment including excessively generous welfare benefits and high rates of income tax
:::


</div>
</div>
