---
title: Historical Background
img: /public/pwa-512x512.png
head:
  - - meta
    - name: description
      content: OG Image Tria;
  - - meta
    - name: keywords
      content: Super Duper SEO
---

<div class="  font-sans   text-4xl font-normal tracking-wide">


<ZoomImg src="/upsc-gs3/indian_economy/illustration/defn-gdp-1000w.avif"
         alt="Defn of GDP "
         width="700" height="100"/>

- The Regulating Act of 1773 was the first step taken by the British Government to control and regulate the affairs of the East India Company in India. It recognized the political and administrative functions of the Company and laid the foundations of central administration in India. The Act designated the Governor of Bengal as the ‘Governor-General of Bengal’ and created an Executive Council of four members to assist him. It made the governors of Bombay and Madras presidencies subordinate to the governor-general of Bengal. It also established a Supreme Court at Calcutta and prohibited the servants of the Company from engaging in any private trade or accepting presents or bribes from the ‘natives’.

- The Amending Act of 1781, also known as the Act of Settlement, was enacted to rectify the defects of the Regulating Act of 1773 It exempted the Governor-General and the Council from the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court for the acts done by them in their official capacity. It also excluded the revenue matters and the matters arising in the collection of revenue from the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.

- The Pitt’s India Act of 1784 distinguished between the commercial and political functions of the Company. It allowed the Court of Directors to manage the commercial affairs, but created a new body called Board of Control to manage the political affairs. It also empowered the Board of Control to supervise and direct all operations of the civil and military government or revenues of the British possessions in India.

- The Act of 1786 was enacted to make provisions for Lord Cornwallis, who was appointed as the Governor-General of Bengal. It gave him the power of his council in special cases and also made him the Commander-in-Chief.

- The Charter Act of 1793 extended the overriding power given to Lord Cornwallis over his council, to all future Governor-Generals and Governors of Presidencies. It gave the Governor-General more powers and control over the governments of the subordinate Presidencies of Bombay and Madras. It also extended the trade monopoly of the Company in India for another period of twenty years.

- The Charter Act of 1813 abolished the trade monopoly of the company in India and asserted the sovereignty of the British Crown over the Company’s territories in India. It also allowed the Christian missionaries to come to India for the purpose of enlightening the people and provided for the spread of western education among the inhabitants of the British territories in India.

- The Charter Act of 1833 made the Governor-General of Bengal as the Governor-General of India and vested in him all civil and military powers. It also ended the activities of the East India Company as a commercial body, which became a purely administrative body.

- The Charter Act of 1853 separated, for the first time, the legislative and executive functions of the Governor-General’s council. It also introduced an open competition system of selection and recruitment of civil servants.

- The Government of India Act of 1858 abolished the East India Company, and transferred the powers of Government, territories and revenues to the British Crown. It provided that India, henceforth, was to be governed by, and in the name of, Her Majesty. It also created a new office, Secretary of State for India, vested with complete authority and control over Indian administration.

- The Indian Councils Act of 1861 was enacted post the revolt of 1857, marking a significant milestone in India's constitutional and political history.
- The Act initiated the representative institutions by involving Indians in the law-making process. The Viceroy was to nominate some Indians as non-official members of his expanded council.
- The Act initiated decentralisation by restoring legislative powers to the Bombay and Madras Presidencies, reversing the centralising tendency that started from the Regulating Act of 1773.
- The Act provided for the establishment of new legislative councils for Bengal, North-Western Provinces and Punjab.
- The Act empowered the Viceroy to make rules and orders for the more convenient transaction of business in the council and introduced the ‘portfolio’ system.
- The Act empowered the Viceroy to issue ordinances, without the concurrence of the legislative council, during an emergency.

- The Indian Councils Act of 1892 increased the number of additional (non-official) members in the Central and provincial legislative councils, but maintained the official majority in them.
- The Act increased the functions of legislative councils and gave them the power of discussing the budget and addressing questions to the executive.
- The Act provided for the nomination of some non-official members of the Central Legislative Council by the viceroy on the recommendation of the provincial legislative councils and the Bengal Chamber of Commerce.

- The Indian Councils Act of 1909, also known as Morley-Minto Reforms, increased the size of the legislative councils, both Central and provincial.
- The Act retained official majority in the Central legislative council, but allowed the provincial legislative councils to have non-official majority.
- The Act enlarged the deliberative functions of the legislative councils at both the levels.
- The Act provided for the association of Indians with the executive councils of the Viceroy and Governors.
- The Act introduced a system of communal representation for Muslims by accepting the concept of ‘separate electorate’.

- The Government of India Act of 1919, also known as Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms, relaxed the central control over the provinces by demarcating and separating the central and provincial subjects.
- The Act introduced bicameralism and direct elections in the country.
- The Act extended the principle of communal representation by providing separate electorates for Sikhs, Indian Christians, Anglo-Indians and Europeans.
- The Act created a new office of the High Commissioner for India in London and transferred to him some of the functions hitherto performed by the Secretary of State for India.

- The Simon Commission was appointed in November 1927 to report on the condition of India under its new Constitution.
- The Communal Award, announced by Ramsay MacDonald, the British Prime Minister, 1932, extended separate electorates to the depressed classes (Scheduled Castes).

- The Government of India Act of 1935 provided for the establishment of an All-India Federation consisting of provinces and princely states as units.
- The Act abolished dyarchy in the provinces and introduced ‘provincial autonomy’ in its place.
- The Act introduced bicameralism in six out of eleven provinces.
- The Act further extended the principle of communal representation by providing separate electorates for depressed classes (Scheduled Castes), women and labour (workers).

- The Indian Independence Act of 1947 declared that the British rule in India would end by June 30,1948; after which the power would be transferred to responsible Indian hands.
- The Mountbatten Plan, put forth by Lord Mountbatten, the Viceroy of India, on June 3, 1947, was accepted by the Congress and the Muslim League, leading to the partition of India.

- The Indian Independence Act of 1947 ended the British rule in India and declared India as an independent and sovereign state from August 15, 1947.

- The Act provided for the partition of India and creation of two independent dominions of India and Pakistan with the right to secede from the British Commonwealth.  

- The Act abolished the office of Viceroy and provided, for each dominion, a governorgeneral, who was to be appointed by the British King on the advice of the dominion cabinet.

- The Act empowered the Constituent Assemblies of the two dominions to frame and adopt any constitution for their respective nations and to repeal any act of the British Parliament, including the Independence act itself.

- The Act empowered the Constituent Assemblies of both the dominions to legislate for their respective territories till the new constitutions were drafted and enforced.

- The Act abolished the office of the Secretary of State for India and transferred his functions to the Secretary of State for Commonwealth Affairs.

- The Act proclaimed the lapse of British paramountcy over the Indian princely states and treaty relations with tribal areas from August 15, 1947.  

- The Act granted freedom to the Indian princely states either to join the Dominion of India or Dominion of Pakistan or to remain independent.

- The Act provided for the governance of each of the dominions and the provinces by the Government of India Act of 1935, till the new Constitutions were framed. The dominions were however authorised to make modifications in the Act.

- The Act deprived the British Monarch of his right to veto bills or ask for reservation of certain bills for his approval. But, this right was reserved for the GovernorGeneral.

- The Act designated the Governor-General of India and the provincial governors as constitutional (nominal) heads of the states. They were made to act on the advice of the respective council of ministers in all matters.  

- The Act dropped the title of Emperor of India from the royal titles of the King of England.  

- The Act discontinued the appointment to civil services and reservation of posts by the secretary of state for India. The members of the civil services appointed before August 15, 1947 would continue to enjoy all benefits that they were entitled to till that time.

- At the stroke of midnight of 14-15 August, 1947, the British rule came to an end and power was transferred to the two new independent Dominions of India and Pakistan. Lord Mountbatten became the first GovernorGeneral of the new Dominion of India.





</div>
