---
title: 

head:
  - - meta
    - name: description
      content: 
  - - meta
    - name: keywords
      content: 
---

<div class="  font-serif    text-base  font-normal tracking-wide">

Amendment of the constitution

- The Constitution of India provides for its amendment to to changing conditions and needs. The amendment procedure is neither as easy as in Britain nor as difficult as in the USA, making the Indian Constitution a synthesis of both flexibility and rigidity.
- Article 368 in Part XX of the Constitution deals with the powers of Parliament to amend the Constitution and its procedure. It allows the Parliament to amend by way of addition, variation or repeal any provision of the Constitution in accordance with the procedure laid down for the purpose.
- The Parliament cannot amend those provisions which form the ‘basic structure’ of the Constitution as ruled by the Supreme Court in the Kesavananda Bharati case (1973).
- The amendment of the Constitution can only be initiated by the introduction of a bill in either House of Parliament, not in the state legislatures. The bill can be introduced either by a minister or by a private member and does not require prior permission of the president.
- The bill must be passed in each House by a special majority, that is, a majority of the total membership of the House and a majority of two-thirds of the members of the House present and voting. Each House must pass the bill separately.
- If the bill seeks to amend the federal provisions of the Constitution, it must also be ratified by the legislatures of half of the states by a simple majority. After being passed by both the Houses of Parliament and ratified by the state legislatures, where necessary, the bill is presented to the president for assent.
- The president must give his assent to the bill. He can neither withhold his assent to the bill nor return the bill for reconsideration of the Parliament. After the president’s assent, the bill becomes an Act and the Constitution stands amended in accordance with the terms of the Act.
- Article 368 provides for two types of amendments, that is, by a special majority of Parliament and also through the ratification of half of the states by a simple majority. But, some other articles provide for the amendment of certain provisions of the Constitution by a simple majority of Parliament.
- The Constitution can be amended in three ways: Amendment by simple majority of the Parliament, Amendment by special majority of the Parliament, and Amendment by special majority of the Parliament and the ratification of half of the state legislatures.
- A number of provisions in the Constitution can be amended by a simple majority of the two Houses of Parliament outside the scope of Article 368. These provisions include Admission or establishment of new states, Formation of new states and alteration of areas, boundaries or names of existing states, Abolition or creation of legislative councils in states, etc.
- The majority of the provisions in the Constitution need to be amended by a special majority of the Parliament, that is, a majority of the total membership of each House and a majority of two-thirds of the members of each House present and voting.
- Those provisions of the Constitution which are related to the federal structure of the polity can be amended by a special majority of the Parliament and also with the consent of half of the state legislatures by a simple majority.
- Critics have criticised the amendment procedure of the Constitution on several grounds such as lack of provision for a special body like Constitutional Convention for amending the Constitution, the power to initiate an amendment to the Constitution lies with the Parliament, Major part of the Constitution can be amended by the Parliament alone either by a special majority or by a simple majority, etc.
- Despite these defects, the process has proved to be simple and easy and has succeeded in meeting the changed needs and conditions. The procedure is not so flexible as to allow the ruling parties to change it according to their whims. Nor is it so rigid as to be incapable of adopting itself to the changing needs.
- The question whether Fundamental Rights can be amended by the Parliament under Article 368 came for consideration of the Supreme Court within a year of the Constitution coming into force. In the Shankari Prasad case (1951), the Supreme Court ruled that the power of the Parliament to amend the Constitution under Article 368 also includes the power to amend Fundamental Rights.
- But in the Golak Nath case (1967), the Supreme Court reversed its earlier stand and ruled that the Fundamental Rights are given a ‘transcendental and immutable’ position and hence, the Parliament cannot abridge or take away any of these rights.
- The Parliament reacted to the Supreme Court’s judgement in the Golak Nath case (1967) by enacting the 24th Amendment Act (1971). This Act amended Articles 13 and 368 and declared that the Parliament has the power to abridge or take away any of the Fundamental Rights under Article 368 and such an act will not be a law under the meaning of Article 13.

However, in the Kesavananda Bharati case3
(1973), the
Supreme Court overruled its judgement in the Golak Nath case
(1967). It upheld the validity of the 24th Amendment Act (1971)
and stated that Parliament is empowered to abridge or take away
any of the Fundamental Rights. At the same time, it laid down a
new doctrine of the ‘basic structure’ (or ‘basic features’) of the
Constitution. It ruled that the constituent power of Parliament
under Article 368 does not enable it to alter the ‘basic structure’ of
the Constitution. This means that the Parliament cannot abridge
or take away a Fundamental Right that forms a part of the ‘basic
structure’ of the Constitution.
The doctrine of basic structure of the constitution was
reaffirmed and applied by the Supreme Court in the Indira Nehru
Gandhi case3a (1975). In this case, the Supreme Court invalidated
a provision of the 39th Amendment Act (1975) which kept the
election disputes involving the Prime Minister and the Speaker of
Lok Sabha outside the jurisdiction of all courts. The court said that
this provision was beyond the amending power of Parliament as it
affected the basic structure of the constitution.
Again, the Parliament reacted to this judicially innovated
doctrine of ‘basic structure’ by enacting the 42nd Amendment Act
(1976). This Act amended Article 368 and declared that there is
no limitation on the constituent power of Parliament and no
amendment can be questioned in any court on any ground
including that of the contravention of any of the Fundamental
Rights.
However, the Supreme Court in the Minerva Mills case4
(1980)
invalidated this provision as it excluded judicial review which is a
‘basic feature’ of the Constitution. Applying the doctrine of ‘basic
structure’ with respect to Article 368, the court held that:
“Since the Constitution had conferred a limited amending power
on the Parliament, the Parliament cannot under the exercise of
that limited power enlarge that very power into an absolute power.
Indeed, a limited amending power is one of the basic features of
the Constitution and, therefore, the limitations on that power
cannot be destroyed. In other words, Parliament cannot, under
article 368, expand its amending power so as to acquire for itself
the right to repeal or abrogate the Constitution or to destroy its
basic features. The donee of a limited power cannot by the
exercise of that power convert the limited power into an unlimited
one”.
Again in the Waman Rao case5
(1981), the Supreme Court
adhered to the doctrine of the ‘basic structure’ and further clarified
that it would apply to constitutional amendments enacted after
April 24, 1973 (i.e., the date of the judgement in the Kesavananda
Bharati case)

ELEMENTS OF THE BASIC STRUCTURE
The present position is that the Parliament under Article 368 can
amend any part of the Constitution including the Fundamental
Rights but without affecting the ‘basic structure’ of the
Constitution. However, the Supreme Court is yet to define or
clarify as to what constitutes the ‘basic structure’ of the
Constitution. From the various judgements, the following have
emerged as ‘basic features’ of the Constitution or elements of the
‘basic structure’ of the constitution:

1. Supremacy of the Constitution
2. Sovereign, democratic and republican nature of the Indian
polity
3. Secular character of the Constitution
4. Separation of powers between the legislature, the executive
and the judiciary
5. Federal character of the Constitution
6. Unity and integrity of the nation
7. Welfare state (socio-economic justice)
8. Judicial review
9. Freedom and dignity of the individual
10. Parliamentary system
11. Rule of law
12. Harmony and balance between Fundamental Rights and
Directive Principles
13. Principle of equality
14. Free and fair elections
15. Independence of Judiciary
16. Limited power of Parliament to amend the Constitution
17. Effective access to justice
18. Principles (or essence) underlying fundamental rights
19. Powers of the Supreme Court under Articles 32, 136, 141
and 1426
20. Powers of the High Courts under Articles 226 and 2277




</div>
